---
title: "Human-Centered Explainable Psychiatric Disorder Diagnosis System Using Wearable ECG Monitors"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/xai-ecg
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-03-15
venue: 'PAKDD'
#slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides2.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-96-8173-0_33'
---
Psychiatric disorders (PDs), such as schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BP), significantly impact global populations, yet their diagnosis remains heavily reliant on subjective clinical methods. This paper presents the PD diagnosis system that integrates wearable electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring, Time Series Convolutional Attention Network, dual visual and textual explanations with Explainable AI (XAI) and Large Visual Language Models (LVLMs), and user-centered interfaces to ensure model transparency, increase applicability in clinical settings. By investigating the relationship between PDs and heart rate variability (HRV), this work paves the way for more objective and accessible clinical assessments with wide-ranging applications in mental health diagnostics. We evaluate our system on the detection of PDs, demonstrating superior performance compared to recent literature models and providing interpretable explanations for model decisions. Additionally, we showcase the system’s applicability to a related use case, highlighting its scalability and potential for widespread adoption.
[Download paper here](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-96-8173-0_33)

Recommended citation:
Nguyen, H., Rahimi, A., Whitford, V., Fournier, H., Kondratova, I., Richard, R. and Cao, H., 2025. Human-Centered Explainable Psychiatric Disorder Diagnosis System Using Wearable ECG Monitors. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 418-429). Springer, Singapore.